>> Hi.
So I'm Rhea Dempsey, and I
am a child birth educator
and a birth attendant,
or more commonly called
a doula these days,
and also a counselor,
and work particularly
with birthing issues.
And I call my work
birthing wisdom.
So that's a sort
of an overall name
of the various
aspects of work that I
do that relate
particularly to birthing.
There are probably quite
a lot of women, you know,
maybe 30, 40, 50% of women who
still deep within themselves--
or even not so deep,
but have a yearning
to want to honor their bodies
and that birthing process.
Some of them, of course, have
taken the cultural message,
which is a very strongly
acculturated fear
message about birth.
And so they might
have that yearning,
but not really seek to act on
it, because they're trading off
against the fear.
So the percentage of women who
are prepared to act on that
and really seek the
information that they need
and make the choices
to give themselves
a chance is probably smaller
than that, you know, 40, 50%--
probably more like--
I don't know, 10%,
or could be even less.
But if we had a
different birth culture
where the options that
could support women's
birthing capacity, if they
were more readily known,
or just really a more
general part of the range
of possibilities, then I'm
sure that many, many more women
would be giving birth in a
more straightforward way,
and would honor that yearning
by seeking those choices.
Yeah, so of that
highly motivated group
of women who are
understanding that they
have to make particular
choices to back themselves.
So some of them
would seek me out.
Some of them would seek out some
other independent educators.
But I guess not all of them are
accessing the sort of education
that they might need either.
So it's quite tricky before
you come into this situation,
to actually know what it is
that you need to be educated.
Another point that
makes that difficult
is that maybe like me,
when I had my first baby,
there are women who have
such a trust in themselves
and their own birthing
capacity, that they don't
feel that they need education.
After all, it's a normal,
physiological process
of a healthy and well body.
But what they don't understand
is that the system really
is not set up in order to
support their potential.
So they might not need
education to be understanding
their own bodies, because
they might feel very
clear and strong
in their own body,
but they do need education to
see how the choices on offer
are going to impact that.
It's not a level playing field.
One of the things
that I feel happens,
is that for these
women who are wanting
to have a go at a normal
birth, that the hospital system
sort of betrays them.
It in a way, lures
us in, feeling
like we've got it all covered,
that this will all be safe,
or it'll all be fine.
But most women don't
understand that that's
at the expense usually, of
their particular capacity
to give birth from
their own body system.
Because the hospitals
are set up really,
to control and to have major
surveillance looking to--
sort of premised on the
idea of worst case scenario
for the mother and the baby.
And then most of the procedures
and the practices and protocols
are based on that
worst case scenario,
and then applied back across to
all women, even low risk women.
And women don't really
understand this,
so they can just go in and be--
feel like, well, any
hospital in any care setting
is going to give me
the same possibility
of the birth unfolding in
the way that I want it to.
So that's really the education--
there's sort of a discernment,
choosing the things that are
really going to work for me.
Home birth, of
course, is ideally,
the place of the
mother's comfort
and her place of
being able to really
be in touch with herself.
Presumably, if women are
choosing a home birth,
they're choosing people who
they feel a warmth with,
and that those people
will come into their home.
So it sets up the
best opportunity
for what we know
of their hormones
and the physiological
process to unfold,
that closeness, that
warmth of relationship,
the known caregivers.
So from that point
of view, home birth
really matches what's needed
for a normal physiological
childbirth.
On the other hand,
of course, home birth
needs to sit within
a broader context
of that important
watching over and guidance
that's required for maintaining
the aspect of safety.
So it's about
getting that balance,
about having the
caregivers who've
got the watchful eye
and the quiet demeanor
to watch over and make sure
that things are unfolding
in a straightforward way, but
really maximizing the place
where the mother's able to
really be in her own body,
and let that unfold.
So home birth-- good process.
Because I've been doing births
for a long time, when I first
had my own first
daughter, it was just
that early time of
fathers coming in
to be present at birth.
We were fighting to get the
fathers to be able to come in.
Fathers at that time,
though, were coming in really
as an observer.
They weren't actively
involved in the birth.
They were hardly were even
allowed to hold your hand.
Now, of course, with
barely one generation in,
the young men who are
coming in as support people
to be at the birth are expecting
to be strongly engaged and very
physically engaged
in the birth process,
and sometimes to
receive the baby.
But what we're also
coming to understand
is that there's a
cost to that, in terms
of the physiology of the
birth often with some mothers.
And I see it happening
that the dads can
be saying all the right things,
and trying to touch and hold
in all the right ways, but
some of these crucial points
in the labor where the mother
is just holding it together
or doesn't quite
know how she's going
to move through this part, or--
and he might be saying
something that sounds fantastic,
but she looks at him with
that lack of credibility,
and saying, well, what
the fuck would you know?
You haven't done it.
How can you tell me that it's
OK, that I can keep going?
Because you haven't
been there, and
haven't walked this journey.
So we're understanding that
what helps women at those points
is really to be able to look
in the eyes of another woman
who has been there, and who
when she says, you can do this,
this is the guidance.
This is the way to come through.
This is the bit of
wisdom about how
you can get through
this next contraction,
or this next breath.
And that credibility
is so important
to stabilize the
mother at that point.
What the research
seems to be suggesting
is that since fathers have
been present at births,
and been there for the
birth of their babies,
that fathering itself is
changing out of sight.
We're seeing it's this
big social shift--
fathers wanting to be
nurturing fathers, not just
the provider father of
really that generation
previously, or certainly
two generations ago--
and that researchers
are looking at that
in the context of
fathers being exposed
to those babies and
the hormonal processes
and bonding that's happening.
And I mean, don't we want that?
Yes, we do-- how fabulous.
What researchers
are also suggesting,
though, is that in
the time that fathers
have been present
at birth, what's
been happening to
the births themselves
is that the intervention rates
are going through the roof,
in the countries where this
phenomenon of fathers being
present at birth is happening.
One part of that
is what I've just
suggested, about when the
going gets tough in that labor,
and the mother is
really needing something
to hold onto, in terms of some
credibility and solidness,
have somebody who knows the next
step, the part of the journey--
Fathers are firstly,
even if they're willing,
don't have the credibility to
hold that particular space.
But also for the father,
that's quite a challenge
to be present with the
woman who he loves,
to see that awesome
potency of sometimes
wildness and distress.
And we talk about
challenge, but really, these
are all beautiful language
for talking about pain.
So that's quite a place to
have to hold, to watch that.
And many men are
not equipped to it,
and not educated to be
able to normalize that.
And so they're
going to freak out.
And they then want to--
we talk about
archetypally, the knight
on the white charger
coming and wanting to save
this damsel in distress.
And so we see that sort
of psychological dynamic
between the couple
being played out.
And I do a lot of work
with midwives, as well as
with some obstetricians.
And they do say that quite
often, the pain relief which
can be then the start of that
cascade of interventions,
often comes in at the point when
the partners are distressed.
So that whole need to save
starts to come forward.
So the point I was making
before about that awareness
in the culture, about
having particular people who
are the right people to hold
that space and enable women
to move through, particularly,
the difficult parts of labor,
the challenging parts
that relate to pain,
that often, the partner is not
that person at that moment.
And hence, a role for somebody
like me, or a midwife, or--
who can hold that space and
encourage the mother on.
If women have made choices
that are going to support them
in their birthing capacity,
the next big challenge
that they face about how
that labor is going to unfold
is what's going to
happen about pain.
Women, in that
situation, then need
support for working with
that challenge of labor,
that pain of labor, that
capacity to keep going.
Often as the labor
is unfolding, they
reach points that I call
crises of confidence,
where what they'd
thought before the labor
and what they're experiencing
now are sort of out of sync,
and I feel like I can't do it.
Now, when it's the father
who is the main support
person for the mother
in these situations--
and they can look pretty
dramatic and strong--
the partners often
want to save the woman.
They can't cope
with her distress
and their own distress, so
they want to save the mother.
Whereas what the research
into the doula work is saying
is that they are spaces where
an experienced other woman who's
walked that journey before
is more able to use the eye
contact and the words
to hold the woman,
and to encourage her,
and guide her through.
So I call it the
intimate holding circle,
the people that
the mother knows,
who she's choosing to be
with her at the birth.
The father of the baby is likely
to be one of those people,
as well as hopefully, some
other experienced women.
But when she's in that drama
of the crisis of confidence,
where what she wants is to
get out of this labor now--
forget all the
things I said before
about how much I
wanted to do it.
Now, it's too much, and I
don't want to do it anymore--
she's looking for a weak link.
It's a process I call
ringing the circle.
You see them.
They're going around
the eyes in that circle.
They're looking to see in
somebody's eyes sympathy.
They can smell the weak
link, because the weak link
is full of fear.
And if they can feel the
fear, smell the fear,
and see the sympathy
in the eyes,
then they'll really
hit the jackpot
in terms of a weakest link.
And that is very
often their partner,
the father of the baby.
So they will tend to--
even though they've
asked their partner to
be there, to support them
through these moments, when
these pain dynamics get going,
this can start to unravel.
And if there's nobody
else in that circle who
can hold that space,
then quite often,
we see the pain
medications, the pain--
in particular, epidurals,
and that whole cascade
then starts to unfold.
In this labor bypass
era, in particular
because of the aspect
about epidurals, yeah?
So I talk about the siren
song of the epidural.
What possibility that epidurals
offer of pain free labor
is that it has, I think,
undermined women's capacity
to stay with the
tough stuff of labor.
It's like it's lowered--
in sporting vernacular, it's
changed not only the goalposts,
but we're on a different
playing field, which
means that for many women--
and I've done a lot of chat
with midwives, and
they say this as well,
is that women are well
outside their comfort zone
much earlier in the labor,
partly because they feel
like they don't have to be
out of their comfort zone,
that they could be comfortable.
That's the promise that
the epidural offers.
I mean, it makes
a big difference
to the process of the labor.
But it can offer comfort at
that level about the pain.
It used to be that
transition was understood
to be the time when women
would feel like, you know,
I don't want to do this anymore.
I want to go home.
And even a home birth,
women would be saying,
I want to go home.
Basically, they just want
to get out of their bodies.
They don't want to be here
and feeling this anymore.
And that would be considered
to be in late first stage.
I talk about a
crisis of confidence,
because there are points
well before transition where
the labor-- the hormones are
coming through more strongly,
and the labor is sort of
kicking up more intense,
where women get a bit
disorganized and can start
to get panicky, feeling
like I can't do this,
it's getting too strong.
It's going to be more
and more and more.
And the behaviors
that we used to think
were transition are happening
much earlier in the labor,
where women are saying,
I can't do it anymore.
It's too much-- getting
very distressed.
So I, as an educator, felt I had
to talk about this differently.
And so I used the word,
a crisis of confidence,
to describe this point.
And whenever I do
presentations on it,
I always do this sort of
squiggly red fear, pain based,
out of control feeling
that women have
that relates to this
crisis of confidence.
And that from that
meaning that anything
is going wrong in
the labor, actually,
for experienced
caregivers, we're
hanging out for the mother to
reach these bits of crisis.
Because they also
mark points at which
they're shifting from their
conscious control into--
if it's well supported--
into the deeper, sort of more
primal, instinctive
place that the birth will
unfold so beautifully from.
So I found this badge, and I
thought, that's my symbol--
crisis of confidence.
I get a lot of good feedback
not only from women, but also
from their partners
about how helpful it
is for them to understand
that this isn't about anything
medically going wrong.
It's about that sort of
challenging place in a labor,
in this instance.
But they can apply it across
to their sporting endeavors,
or taking on a new
task at work, or facing
some challenge in some studies.
But there are
points in our lives
where we need particular
experienced support
to help us get through a point
where we're a bit disorganized
and we haven't quite got
what the next step is.
And so a crisis of confidence--
people are able to see
that this doesn't only
relate to birthing, but it can
be a way of understanding life.
And that in most things in life,
we look for a bit of expertise
when we're in one
of these crises.
And that feeds back again into
what I was saying earlier,
about who are the appropriate
experienced people that women
would have around them,
that they can sort of lean
into and trust that
they'll get the guidance
that they need about how
to keep going through this,
rather than at these points
when these crises are coming up,
have the whole
drug pathways come
through that take that labor
off into a different point.
People associate
it with me, so I
was very happy to find a brooch
that I could wear that symbol.
If couples aren't
really aware of this--
what I call pain dynamics--
and certainly,
first of all, it can
unfold into that cascade
of interventions.
So the birth that they
wanted to go that way,
is now going this way.
So there can be disappointment
and grief around that change.
There can also be on the part
of the mother, a diminishment
of her sense of
her own capacity,
because she had thought that she
was going to be able to do it,
and that she had that
great team around her.
But outside of
that, there can also
be in the couple relationship--
ongoing relationship-- in a way,
the fathers are sort of damned
if they do, or
damned if they don't.
Because women are often
feeling afterwards
if he wasn't able
to hold that space,
they're feeling
disappointed in him,
or feeling like he let her down.
But in the moments when
he's trying to do his best,
he either hasn't got the
credibility she needs,
so she dismisses what he's
saying, or his sympathy is up,
and he's wanting to save her.
And so then that unfolds.
So I've done quite a lot of
couple counseling after birth,
not only reviewing the birth
and unfolding what had happened,
but really working
out for the couple
where their disappointments
with one another might be.
What the research
is saying is that
for normal physiological
childbirth,
women are best
supported by known,
experienced
caregivers, one on one,
continuously
throughout the labor.
That research that's coming out
of the doula research, as well
as the midwifery research.
And one of the key
aspects to it is
this idea of
experienced caregivers,
or experienced, known person.
Now, of course, the father
is known to the mother,
but they're not
experienced in birth.
So we've got to get
that whole circle.
And ideally, when a
couple are supported
by somebody who has experience
in the whole journey of labor,
what it does is enable
the greatest strengths
of the couple relationship
to come forward
without that being strained.
Because in those moments
when that extra guidance
and that extra support is--
expertise is required,
that comes in,
is offered to the mother, she
moves through those sticky bits
in the labor, and then
the couple relationship
comes to the fore again, and
the couple do that dance.
And that enables the couple's
physicality to come forward,
their sort of hormonal
and sensual connection
to come forward, and also,
that beautiful bonding
between the couple and the
baby once the baby's born.
When that extra level of support
and expertise isn't in there,
then that's when
we see this sort
of dysfunction of this
dynamic between the couple,
leading to--
as I'm saying, either that need
or the wish on the partner's
side to want to save the mother
from the hard work of it,
or the sort of place where
he's trying his best,
but she's unable to
really take that support,
because she doesn't
feel like he's
got any credibility in this
particular point in time.
One of the ways I try and
explain that in my workshops--
and I'm doing some writing
on this at the moment--
is that pretty well
through our prehistory,
and if we think
about birth, we think
about this is women's business.
And we think about women being
supported by other women,
experienced women.
So we might say that that's
a deep layer of practice
and understanding
in women's psyche.
Some people call that
archetypal level.
I feel what's
happening is that women
have this yearning, this
archetypal yearning to be
supported by experienced women.
But in our present era, they're
acculturated to assuming
that this is their male partner.
And so the deep unconscious
expectation of the male partner
to know exactly what to do, to
know exactly how to hold me,
to know exactly the right
thing to say or not say,
or without being
told, I think it's
a sort of a mismatch between
the deep yearning for having
the experienced womanly
support around them--
that that's a
mismatch for really,
their partners, the men who
would be giving that support.
And when that all
unravels in the labor,
both the man and
the woman come out
of that wondering,
what happened?
And within a place
with one another
where they'd been
through an experience
that they had thought was going
to be deeply bonding, only
to find that there can be
some chinks of not exactly
estrangement, but
wondering, you know--
that letting one another down.
So in care settings where women
have got that circle of support
from experienced women
and their partner there,
that's a beautiful
bringing forward
of ancient wisdom that's lived
still in our deeper instincts,
as well as opening into
this new possibility
for fathering that's
changing, for a deepening
of the sensuality and
sexuality of the couple
into their birthing
experience as well.
As I'm even saying
it to you, my body
just is a-tingle with that
oxytocin and that experience,
that I've had the privilege
to witness between couples.
As we're understanding
more about the hormones
that are present in
the birth and how
to facilitate that hormonal
process in the mother's body,
we know that it relates
very much to the sensuality
and the sexual
life of the mother.
Of course, having the father
present when he's supported
as well as the woman
being supported
by other experienced women, it
enables that deepened sexuality
between the couple to be
an adjunct to the mother's
birthing capacity.
You've probably heard that we're
talking about orgasmic birth
now.
Oh, wouldn't that be wonderful?
Well, if you're putting it in
that context, then of course,
the sexual partner
of the mother is
part of a situation
that is going
to enable that sexuality and
sensuality to come forward,
which boosts the capacity for
the physiological in birth
to be present.
So where I think we're on
an exciting cusp of bringing
some new threads together
that will bring the father
in in a particular way.
But we need to also be mindful
of the ancient wisdom, which
is really that this space
about sacred women's work,
and how to blend those elements.
That's the point of
takeoff, I think.
For contemporary
birthing women, we really
have to say that the
acculturation around them,
the sort of--
if you like, unconscious
education that they're getting
is really all about fear.
The birth isn't to be trusted.
It's a fearful process.
It's a very painful process.
They shouldn't
have to be martyrs.
It's a very negative education.
So for women who really
ideally have the capacity
to give birth, and who might
want to action that, ideally,
they would be
protecting themselves
from that sort of
negative acculturation,
and we'd call that
education, and be
given different ways
of thinking about it,
different visual images,
different understandings
about the sort of
consequences of the choices
that they're making.
And ideally, that would
be happening a lot earlier
in their lives,
long before they're
ready to have that first baby.
Because there's an
acculturation that's
living in their
unconscious, let alone
in the conscious understandings
that they've got.
So that speaks to education well
back in their earlier years,
probably at least at
puberty, even before that.
So that they've got a
trust in the process, which
has been eroded in the
culture that we're living in
at the moment.
I call this the
labor bypass era,
where women are getting
strong messages about--
that they don't really have
to do their labors anymore.
They could find people who would
rather do elective caesars,
or they certainly don't have
to feel their labor anymore.
We don't value that process of
women working with their bodies
to birth their babies--
so the labor bypass era.
It's across the board in the
acculturation and the messages
that women get.
Women who are still,
what I would call,
willing women, who
want to have a go--
they-- whether they really
understand it or not--
are actually
counter-cultural women now.
They're going against what
their cultural message is,
by wanting to honor
their birthing capacity
and give it a bit
of space to unfold.
It's been my life's work.
But really, I'm
speaking from still--
Rhea, at 28, having
my first baby,
wishing somebody had been
able to speak that to me
before I was sort
of funneled down
the choice that led me
to the birth experience
with my first daughter
that didn't really
give me the satisfaction of
how I wanted that birth to be.
The normal
physiological processes
as it unfolds, has an ancient,
primal wisdom about it
in terms of
preparation for bonding
and all those love
hormones coming through.
Now, I know that as human
beings, we're ever creative.
So we can think ourselves into
love and loving those babies.
But the normal process
offers at the level
of biology, a hormonal
grounding for that deep bonding.
And these human babies,
they're the most precarious
of all the mammal babies.
They need a few people who are
so strongly bonded to them,
that they're prepared
to put themselves out
in order to offer
what that child needs.
Now, offering it at a
physical level is one thing.
And even in our
present culture, I
think we're privileging
the comfort of the couple
to maintain the
lifestyle that they're
getting used to over the
needs of the baby, even
at a physical level.
And I guess I would speak
to all the control crying,
and that the baby has to
fit in with the lifestyle
that we want to have,
rather than us attuning
to what the baby's needs are.
So we have that at
a physical level.
But at a physical
level, that also
means that a hormonal level--
I'm also interested
in and passionate
about the psychological level--
about what this is then, in
the psychological development
of that child, the deep
attachment processes
of the security of attachment.
All of that, normal,
physiological childbirth
offers the most
solid base for that
to then be moving forward from.
Normal physiological childbirth
also offers the couple--
if we understand the
stuff about the dynamics
about the relationship,
and making
sure there's experienced
people there--
it offers the couple
a grounded place
to start their
parenting from, which
is a shared basis of hormone,
a shared basis of wish and hope
for a particular type of birth.
So if we don't value
birthing and support it,
certainly, we can
get babies born.
But we're missing out on
something of great depth.
When women are doing the work of
laboring well supported, they--
you know, we call it
a rite of passage.
Now, a rite of passage--
I know people undertake rites of
passage in all sorts of places
and spaces in their lives.
But a rite of passage,
I guess, is at core,
is something about coming
up against ourselves,
being confronted by who
we are and our strengths
and weaknesses, and
seeing how we're
going to come through
some challenging process.
What part of me can
take me forward?
What parts of me are going to
need to be strengthened a bit?
What parts of me are
going to hold me back
from taking on this challenge?
So if we understand birth
to be the rite of passage
into strong and
empowered mothering,
you know, 50 years of
parenting coming forward--
pretty challenging process.
And the tempering
that the birth can
give to the mother in the
deep parts of her being,
to strengthen, to be ready for
that 50 years of challenging
parenting--
why would we want to miss it?
We're being given-- women
are being told that they
can be comfortable in birthing.
The epidurals can do it.
If we only do the
parts of parenting
that we feel comfortable
with, pity help the kids.
So there is something about
the template about birthing,
and taking it on, and going
through that rite of passage,
having the support around that
helps you to move through that,
that sets a pattern in the
mother, at least-- and I think,
for the partners--
to feel like with
the right support,
I can take on anything.
And with the right support, my
own strength will come forward.
And this is a fabulous place
to be starting our parenting
journey from.
So I think that normal
birth offers us that.
In that rite of
passage aspect, where
we're coming up
against ourselves,
we're often coming up
against our own wounds.
Our own wounds may be from
our own birth experiences,
our own wounds from our early
years in our own family life.
And here we are
on this threshold,
ready to birth our own babies
and create our own families.
So in that mix can come some
of those deep wounds, which
might add to the layer
of fear that we have,
or add to our layer of
feeling that we don't have
the strength or the capacity.
Now, what I see over and over
again in births-- and I've now,
through these years
of doing birth,
been at over 1,000 births--
that's a lot of hours of seeing
these transformative processes
that women undergo--
with the right support
and understanding,
women can entirely surprise
themselves and move
into transformed places--
wounds that become
healed, wounds
that then become sources of
strength for their parenting.
Now, the interventions
can get a baby born,
but they don't give the mother
that place to really touch
into her deepest being.
If you like, a lot of people
might call this soul work--
what's more commonly now
being called soul work--
to strengthen and
to transform things
that have been weaknesses into
things that are now strengths
for us and resource bases.
It's more commonly called
resilience training.
We're doing it with
kids, you know?
Births are the complete
package for offering anybody
who's in that circle--
the mom, particularly,
but anybody else
in that circle to
witness that work,
and to give support for it.
It offers on a plate, a
complete possibility for all
these aspects to unfold.